[Music]
in 1977 the physicist Edward Purcell
calculated that if you push a bacteria
and then let go it will stop in about a
millionth of a second in that time it
will have traveled less than the width
of a single atom the same holds true for
a sperm and many other microbes it all
has to do with being really small
microscopic creatures inhabit a world
alien to us we're making it through an
inch of water is an incredible endeavor
but why does size matter so much for a
swimmer what makes the world of a sperm
so fundamentally different from that of
a sperm whale to find out we need to
dive into the physics of fluids here's a
way to think about it imagine you're
swimming in a pool it's you and a whole
bunch of water molecules water molecules
outnumber you a thousand trillion
trillion to one so pushing past them
with your gigantic body is easy but if
you are really small say you were about
the size of a water molecule all of a
sudden it's like you're swimming in a
pool of people rather than simply
swishing by all the teeny tiny molecules
now every single water molecule is like
another person you have to push past to
get anywhere in 1883 the physicist
Osborne Reynolds figured out that there
is one simple number that can predict
how a fluid will behave it's called the
Reynolds number and it depends on simple
properties like the size of the swimmer
its speed the density of the fluid and
the stickiness or the viscosity of the
fluid what this means is that creatures
of very different sizes inhabit vastly
different worlds for example because of
its huge size a sperm whale inhabits the
large Reynolds number world if it flaps
its tail once it can coast ahead for an
incredible distance meanwhile sperm live
in a low Reynolds number world if a
sperm were to stop flapping its tail it
wouldn't even coast past a single atom
to imagine what it would feel like to be
a sperm you need to bring yourself down
to its Reynolds number picture yourself
in a tub of molasses with your arms
moving about as slow as the minute hand
of a clock and you'd have a pretty good
idea of what a sperm is up again
so how do microbes manage to get
anywhere well many don't bother swimming
at all they just let the food drift to
them this is somewhat like a lazy cow
that waits for the grass under its mouth
to grow back but many microbes do swim
and this is where those incredible
adaptations come in one trick they can
use is to deform the shape of their
paddle by cleverly flexing their paddle
to create more drag on the powerstroke
and on the recovery stroke single-celled
organisms like paramecia managed to inch
their way through the crowd of water
molecules but there's an even more
ingenious solution arrived at by
bacteria and sperm instead of wagging
their paddles back and forth they wind
them like a corkscrew just as a
corkscrew on a wine bottle converts
winding motion into forward motion these
tiny creatures spin their helical tails
to push themselves forward in a world
where water feels as thick as cork other
strategies are even stranger some
bacteria take Batman's approach they use
grappling hooks to pull themselves along
they can even use this grappling hook
like a slingshot and fling themselves
forward others use chemical engineering
h pylori lives only in the slimy acidic
mucus inside our stomachs it releases a
chemical that thins out the surrounding
mucus allowing it to glide through slime
maybe it's no surprise that these guys
are also responsible for stomach ulcers
so when you look really really closely
at our bodies and the world around us
you can see all sorts of tiny creatures
finding clever ways to get around in a
sticky situation without these
adaptations bacteria would never find
their hosts and sperms would never make
it to their eggs which means you would
never get stomach ulcers but you would
also never be born in the first place
you